all right well it says that I'm live uh
so I guess I have to take its word for
it uh hi everyone who's here looks like
a few people are here already uh so
happy to see
you thanks for joining uh Noel and uh
glad you're excited to be here I'm
excited to be here too although I
honestly don't know what to
expect
um I'm kind of wondering if uh hi
riverly
um hey the mastermind1 thanks for
joining um yeah I'm kind of kind of
wondering what what attendance will be
like today it's a it is after all a
Friday afternoon uh hi T Wills hi T tan
thanks for joining everyone um anyway
I'm Dr Mark Eaton um I'm a licensed
psychologist uh with an somewhat
um unusual specialty my clinical
specialty is working with pathological
narcissism and
NPD um and uh I'm here to answer
questions and uh talk all things uh
narcissism so um let's have at it I'm
wondering if anybody has any questions
to start
off hi BD Wilson Neil yeah thanks thanks
for thanks for being
here so uh let's
see T Wills uh how does how do feel
feeling switch off for someone uh we
once deeply felt for is this attachment
Theory related or specific to narcissism
and is there a difference so I I guess I
imagine what you're talking about here
is um the kind of fluctuation in the
intensity of feelings for some people
who have a narcissistic uh personality
configuration where um when there's a
breakup uh or a separation of some kind
it's almost like uh the the the love
object is just like you just kind of
don't like they just kind of cease to be
uh a factor in some way and I've heard
um a number of patients that I work with
discuss this phenomenon as well um as
far as how that actually happens um I
you know I'd be hard pressed to I think
come up with a specific mechanism um and
I I'd kind of just be hypothesizing here
uh I think you're probably on to
something when you discuss uh attachment
um so you know most if not all of the
patients with whom I've worked that I
would say had a narcissistic issue of
some kind or another um they had a
significant
um they had significant attachment
avoidance um and so you know if you may
have seen this if you watched my most
recent video uh but uh essentially human
attachment comes down to two uh
Dimensions right there's the U dimension
of attachment avoidance uh and then
there's the dimension of attachment
anxiety and I'm kind of going like this
not not because I'm intending to bless
the screen uh but because um that that
uh that configuration is typically
conceptualized uh using a chart with an
X and A Y AIS uh where the x axis is
attachment avoidance and the y- axis is
attachment anxiety um and uh when we're
thinking about attachment avoidance uh
we also call that uh sort of an internal
working model of other people um and uh
and often times when somebody has uh
experienced certain kinds of abuse or or
emotional neglect uh when they were very
young and throughout their growing years
um as well as some peer rejection
sometimes um they can be high in
attachment avoidance and that's because
their internal working model of other
people tends to be negative right so
they've experienced a lot of uh
disappointment a lot of frustration a
lot of Heartache uh with respect to
their um their primary caregivers and
other attachment figures in their lives
and so they therefore have kind of
internalized this uh negative or
distrustful model of other people um and
and really what that ends up causing uh
over time is um it sort of interferes
with a person's ability to really
feel um their you know their love for
someone else um it makes it difficult to
S to be vulnerable uh with other people
um and uh and it tends to kind of turn
the volume down on uh the various
dependency longings uh and and the the
feelings of of longing for attachment uh
and close relationships um that uh that
other people might experience and so um
another thing that can happen with high
levels of attachment avoidance is that
the person tends to get really good at
just kind of not paying attention uh to
their feelings um and uh and that's
something that you even see in childhood
attachment uh studies where they're like
observing the child um and they have
this uh situation called The Strange
situation where the caregiver and the
child are together in a room and the
researchers watch them interact for a
while and then suddenly the caregiver
gets up and leaves the room and the
caregivers watch how the child reacts to
the the sudden absence of the caregiver
when the child is in this strange
situation um and children who are high
in uh avoidance um they tend to not
react to the absence of the caregiver
they tend to focus in on neutral stimuli
a toy that they're playing with or or
whatever um and uh but if you take like
physiological readings of the child uh
like monitor their blood pressure or
their heart rate or something like that
uh you see that they are actually
distressed they're just learning to
disconnect from that feeling of distress
they're learning not to represent that
distress to themselves and they're
learning not to express it um and so I
think something like that happens um uh
when there's a breakup or there's a loss
of some kind for somebody who's high in
narcissism um they they tend to default
back to that kind of avoidant attachment
uh coping strategy where they just they
just don't think about it um and uh and
and that's one way that uh that that can
kind of play out so I hope that answers
your question uh I guess you know at the
end of the day my answer would be yes I
think that that does uh relate to
underlying attachment
Dimensions um and I don't think it's
specific to narcissism I've seen it in
other personality configurations as well
uh I think that's about attachment
avoidance so thank you uh T Wills for
the
question
um what else oh it's I always feel like
I'm in the hot seat when I'm doing this
it's a bit of a rush but it's also uh
kind of nerve-wracking so um I apologize
if it takes me a few minutes to kind of
get into the swing
here
um okay so narcissist hex I was just
wondering if you have any opinion on a
cure for NPD or if it's like a condition
like diabetes where you just manage it
well you know as I've said in uh in
other uh videos and podcasts and stuff
in mental health we don't really think
about things in terms of cures uh we and
that's because we don't really
understand the underlying mechanisms
that uh presumably are responsible for
the Psychopathology right and in fact
even when it comes to sort of defining
the
Psychopathology um that's something
that's typically you know decided by
committee more or less uh you know the
American Psychiatric association I'm I'm
referencing the DSM up there gets
together uh you know on a fairly regular
basis and they have meetings where they
review the EV
and the most recent research as well as
probably some other political
considerations uh that that they have uh
you know and they they draw new lines
around disorders right um you know well
we're gonna take this criteria out of
this disorder and we're going to add
this criteria to this disorder uh we're
going to change you know the duration of
symptoms you know to qualify for the
disorder we're going to add this new
disorder Etc um and that's and that's
because we don't really have like a
biological basis uh you know as a
foundation right validating these um
these constructs you know so we don't
have like a lab test you can't draw
blood and be like aha you've got you
know uh th such and such levels of
depression right it's it's not like uh
in The Phantom Menace right where
they're like measuring how much force
you know somebody has by by their
medoran levels it's not like that uh in
mental health and so we don't really
because we can't conceptualize it in
that kind of a concrete way we can't
really talk about cure because while the
symptoms May remit uh and there may be
substantial Improvement in the person's
life uh since we really didn't know what
caused the problem to to begin with we
can't really say well now you're cured
you know we can just say well now you're
doing better right uh or now you don't
qualify for this disorder anymore or
something like that uh and so um you
know I really don't tend to
conceptualize uh mental illness in a
biological way and so you know and
that's that might be just be my bias as
a psychologist too right I'm trained in
Psychology so I think about things
psychologically um and not not so much
neurologically and and that sort of
thing not so much medically um so when
it comes to comparing something like NPD
to something like diabetes that's the
first disconnect for me is you know
diabetes is a very well understood uh
physiological condition whereas NPD is a
not very well understood psychological
condition and even experts on NPD you
know they won't necessarily agree on the
on the core or essential features of NPD
um you know they're like for instance
I've made a number of videos about my
disagreements with the DSM model of NPD
so um so anyway that's that's kind of
like the context okay that's the frame
I'm trying to draw around my answer here
uh which is you know I guess really just
depends on the person on their situation
um and on the the specific kind of
configuration uh that of of NPD or
pathological narcissism uh with which
they're presenting um for some people I
would say that yeah this is you know
it's it's sort of it's a chronic
condition and you're and you're doing
your best to manage it and for other
people um you know there there might be
um a fairly quick or even a you know it
might take longer but there there can be
remission right um uh and and that's
again even the term remission is a
little bit problematic because the way
that I conceptualize these issues um is
really kind of like a developmental
model it's a developmental trauma uh
that that
interrupts um the the development of
whole object
relationships uh of a complex and
nuanced and realistic and stable model
of self and other people uh and because
of those issues the person ends up
having to rely on maladaptive coping
strategies to deal with all the slings
and arrows that you know life throws at
them um and then those maladaptive
coping strategies beget you know more
trauma and more issues which the person
internalizes in the form of more wounds
to the self Etc um and so if you can if
you can help the person uh begin to step
outside of that you know kind of cycle
of of of
destabilizing responses uh to to
experience um and then at the same time
be providing them with some of the
materials in in the form of you know um
validating self-object experiences and
uh the experience of empathy um and kind
of a a reparative um experience of
uh being sort of seen and mirrored and
understood uh then to my mind the self
begins to heal uh and so I wouldn't
really even think of symptoms remitting
at that point I would think of the
person developing past the the place
where they would need to be relying on
some of those maladaptive coping
strategies anyway uh I don't know if
that I don't know if that answers your
question narcissist hex I might have
just opened up you know 12 other cans of
worms uh in the in the course of trying
to answer it um but I guess I guess what
I'm trying to say is it's not so cut and
dry as just you know can we cure this or
not um everybody's different and uh and
really I I I see this you know I I chose
the word heal and P the the name heal
and PD for a reason um because I see
this as a wound that that needs to heal
um and um and that's my perspective on
it so I don't know if that answers your
question or not but thanks so much for
asking
it uh what else
okay tan do I understand correctly that
you like to use psychoanalytic and
dynamic approaches what made you decide
to stray from more common schools of
therapy and how did it show in results
of healing
patients you do understand that
correctly yeah um so I'm a I'm a
psychoanalytic psychotherapist I'm not a
psychoanalyst because that is a whole
other Echelon of
training uh you know essentially
psychoanalysts have a doctorate on top
of
their original license eligible
degree so and I don't have that um but I
have spent a lot of time um researching
and reading and uh participating in case
consultation groups and I was on the
board of directors for a local
psychoanalytic Association uh for a
number of years and I currently teach uh
psychoanalytic uh Concepts uh and
interventions uh to doctoral students um
so I you know I fairly well versed uh in
in the in the various models um in the
psychoanalytic uh
tradition um so what made me decide to
choose that well it just always spoke to
me um I feel
like uh and there's
another
uh I think he's a psychologist out there
named Jonathan shedler and he's a a an
advocate
for uh you know kind of well he's an
advocate for for psychodynamic
approaches really um and uh one of the
things that that he talks about in a
presentation and I think you can find it
online somewhere is that the tendency
toward um you know these kind of what
are called manualized therapies um and
uh and he describes therapists sort of
becoming technicians right instead of
clinicians they're becoming technicians
some who opens up the book opens up the
manual and then applies the the
intervention right whatever the manual
says the intervention ought to be and
the problem here is that um
Psychotherapy is really uh both a
science and an art right uh and the art
piece of it has to do with um and I feel
like that's in some ways the essential
piece of it which is um the ability to
to sit with human suffering
um and to
try uh against despite whatever odds you
know might be present uh either for or
against but to to try to connect with
that person on a human level um because
I feel like um a lot of the things that
cause you know the the the the car to go
off the rails when it comes to human
psychology you know has to do with um
with ways that people have just just
been damaged or hurt or wounded or
abused or traumatized uh in the context
of Human Relationships and so I see
Psychotherapy as fundamentally a
reparative process um that is uh
relational and so um you know a lot of
the kind of what you're describing as
more common schools of therapy they're
really about um you know uh okay we've
got a circumscribed disorder here right
and now we've got a now we've got a
a manualized treatment to apply to this
disorder and that's a very
medicalized way of of looking at these
things um and it's in and one of the
reasons it's that way is because it's
much easier to research things like that
so you know and I'm not I'm not knocking
it I I see the value of that um but you
know what I find is that when I teach
doctoral students who are you know
training to become licensed
psychologists
themselves they get a lot of that stuff
like they're just inundated in these you
know in like CBT and and act and all of
these kind of manualized approaches
right um that are uh empirically based
okay um which is itself a little bit of
a you know because psychodynamic
approaches are also empirically uh based
as well um and they're also empirically
validated in a number of ways but it's
it's not really the you know the brand I
guess but
um anyway they they they get these
things and these techniques they're not
that difficult to to get right but the
thing that they really struggle with and
the thing that that I find is the most
helpful for them is to talk with them
about how do we make meaning out of what
the patient is is is describing right
how do we how do you connect with this
person in a way that feels real and
authentic and have something called a
moment of meeting right a moment where
there's a connect a connection of some
kind because those are the moments that
make a difference in Psychotherapy those
are the times I think if you look back o
across your your life and you think
about well what were the moments that
really impacted me and really made a
difference for me it was a moment of
meeting of some kind a moment where you
were seen by someone else or you saw
someone else uh and something happens
there and um and and so I in my
experience the psychoan antic school of
thought um and it's various branches on
that tree but they're all uh sort of
about how do we make meaning out of this
suffering right how do we listen how do
we really listen to Somebody uh and
really sort of be curious about what
they're what they're trying to tell us
how do we how do we listen on multiple
different levels not just you know okay
what's the symptom ah this is the
intervention right and and by the way I
think there's a place for that uh but
but
for me I I've always it it's just never
been enough you know and and I've I've
done plenty of CBT you know uh I worked
for Kaiser for a year and I did nothing
but CBT and nothing but didactic groups
and and all that stuff and and I just at
the end of the day it just didn't I it
didn't feel like I was connecting with
people and it didn't feel like I was
helping them in the way that I wanted to
help them um and so I just always come
back to to psychodynamic Psych analytic
stuff and that's just where I feel most
at home um as far as you know results
um so you know there it this isn't well
known but um there's
actually uh plenty of research out there
that that demonstrates that not only is
our psychodynamic approaches on par with
uh you know sort of the more common
schools of therapy uh like CBT and stuff
like that uh but they actually surpass
them um According to some metrics and
one of those metrics is something called
effect size and what effect size is is
when you do like a um a metaanalytic
study where you take lots of different
studies and you put them all together
you need some way to to to say okay well
you know like for instance to answer a
broad question is therapy helpful well
let's look at PL like a hundred
different studies of psychotherapy right
and somehow we're gonna try to answer
the question uh is therapy helpful
that's called a metaanalytic study uh
and the way that they do that is by
looking at something called effect size
which is what is the mean difference
across all these studies what's the mean
difference um in you know in terms of
standard deviations right so
um on average right um
Psychotherapy any kind of psychotherapy
has a certain uh effect size it it it it
results in a certain mean difference in
terms of improve symptom Improvement and
you look at that um and and so an effect
size of one would be that's one standard
deviation above the mean okay so that's
considered a significant like a like a
massive effect size um anyway the point
being uh when you look across all these
different meta analytic studies what you
see is that there are comparable uh
effect sizes uh between psychodynamic
psychotherapies and things like CBT and
say things like act and whatever
else um over a certain span of time but
then what you see is that for the
psychodynamic and psychoanalytic
therapies that effect size continues to
increase over time even after therapy
stops um and so you end up seeing like
crazy effect sizes over over a certain
longitudinal period of time that are
like 1.5 or whatever which is just it's
a crazy strong effect and one of the
reasons that are kind of hypothesized
for that is because in psychodynamics
and analytic therapies you're not just
treating symptoms right you're sitting
with someone over a period of time and
actually they're kind of internalizing a
new way of thinking and a new way of
relating not just to themselves but to
other people as well and that that new
way uh that new capacity continues to
serve them over time and so even after
treatment ends there're still making
gains whereas you know if you just uh
did did a more circumscribed treatment
for more circumscribed issue um they
might show gains while treatment is
happening but then there's a tendency uh
for them to lose those gains over time
after treatment stops anyway um I've
I've got a I've got a whole presentation
that I give to University students on
this um in Psychology courses um and
maybe someday I'll put that up online
and you can see the uh see the research
I'm talking about but anyway thank you
so much for the question
okay Noel says how common is the
comorbidity of NPD and BPD and how does
it manifest in comparison to just NP NPD
or just BPD um I think they're often uh
coor and um in fact when I think about
the the uh collapse of the grandios
defenses in NPD um into a vulnerable
experience um I often times I feel like
that looks very very much like BPD um
and the only reason I wouldn't call it
BPD necessarily is because there's a
fluctuation between that kind of
vulnerable uh fragmenting uh borderline
kind of experience uh and the more um
defended constituted grandiose
experience um and that's something that
uh people with BPD don't necessarily
have right they don't necessarily have
that kind of grandiose false self um
presentation that hides the underlying
distress and
fragmentation um so but you know one way
to think about this is um in terms of
borderline personality organization
which is different than borderline
personality disorder uh this is a
psychoanalytic concept um but I find it
just tremendously useful um and so if
you think about this in terms of like a
developmental progress over time right
um very very early in life we would have
something called a psychotic personality
organization it's called psychotic uh
because the person is struck is like the
main developmental task is just like
dealing with reality right and not
distorting reality uh every time there's
distress uh and so once you kind of got
that down and you're like okay reality
is reality and I can tolerate that
reality doesn't always conform to my
wishes and that it's frustrating
sometimes once once you have that
defensive structure in place then you
kind of graduate to the next task which
is to separate the concepts of self and
other right so what's me versus what's
you what when something is happening
inside of me is it because of of what
you did right or is it because of what
what I'm feeling or right do my thoughts
influence you do your thoughts influence
me Etc and that might seem kind
of like the way I just described it it
might sound kind of silly or rudimentary
or something but that's actually what
people with a borderline personality
organization struggle with right uh
where where does the distress live is it
in you or is it in me do I feel
distressed because of something you did
or something you thought or because I'm
distressed did you intend for me to to
feel that way does that make you bad if
I feel bad are you right so there's this
confusion about what is self and what is
not self um and oftentimes with people
with BPD um you know one of one of the
reasons why BP PD is called borderline
personality disorder is because it has
many of the Hallmarks of borderline
personality organization it's kind of
like uh the poster child of Personality
borderline personality organization um
the struggle in BPD between what is self
and what is other uh is just takes
Center the the is of central importance
um the person you know really has
trouble with boundaries a lot of the
time uh they tend to you
know um attach like um really intensely
uh but then there can be a feeling of
being kind of invaded by the other
person and they don't like that and so
then they push the person Away really
really strong like really hard um and
and you know and then but then when they
do that then they feel abandoned um and
so then they pull back and then they
push and they pull and they push and
they pull and that's kind of the dynamic
in BPD um and there can be a lot of
self-hatred uh that that goes along with
that process as well and a lot of um
like pain and distress that just can't
be located and kind of can't be
articulated and so um that can express
itself in the form of self harm and uh
and stuff like that as well
um that is a very similar experience to
what is happening in a in a vulnerable
phase or a collapse uh in NPD there's
the same kind of boundary confusion
often there's the same kind of really
intense attachment anxiety uh there's
the same kind of self-hatred uh that
that can happen um the same kind of
emotional disconstraint uh that you know
you see in BPD as well and and the
reason for that isn't necessarily
because they're like comorbid disorders
it's because there's a borderline
personality organization and that's what
borderline personality organization
looks like
um in NPD then there is this kind of uh
like
um kind of almost like a splinter skill
or something like this this part of the
person that has been
um kind of created uh to um sort of
pretend right to give the impression of
um not being in that kind of distress
and we would call that the false
um and and that that kind of aspect of
the personality that false self aspect
tends to um kind of kind of even even if
there there's a borderline personality
organization it tends to kind of pop up
and and live uh in a slightly higher
uh uh Stratus in terms of functioning uh
and and not because
um am I'm trying to say here um it's
like it's it's it's almost like a suit
of armor or something or you know that
that the person can kind of like they've
they've had to adapt in this way they
can pull themselves together in this one
kind of specific way uh and and appear
both to themselves and other people like
they're self-sufficient and they're
they're good to go you know uh they got
this um and and that's that's what we
call the false self um so I I hope that
helps um also made a video on this you
can find it on my channel I think it's
called is it vulnerable narcissism or
BPD um and it and it goes into these um
these Dynamics in a little bit more
detail but I guess that you know that
the short answer would be um yes I I
feel like BPD and NPD are very close and
there's overlap in in a number of ways
um and um there tends to be a little bit
of a difference in terms of the core
conflict that the personality like
defensive personality structure is
organized around um for NPD it has to do
with um the viability of self and
self-esteem and for BPD it has to do
with um like attachment anxiety and and
and feeling um some intense ambivalence
about um how close versus how far others
are from the self okay thanks for the
question oh my goodness uh this
this is a big question here uh Norman
says what general advice would I give a
room of people with NPD that are open to
the idea of making some prescribed
Lifestyle Changes um I guess that
the so
um it would have to do
with sort of embracing
vulnerability um
and and it would have have to do with
sort of a a kind of a a radical
self-acceptance
um accepting who you are exactly as you
are in this moment that doesn't mean
that that like oh everything's great you
don't have to do that's not that that's
that's not necessarily what I'm talking
about I'm talking about just accepting
the reality that you are as you are you
are who you are um
and and and and trying to find a way
that that can be okay um a a metaphor
that I use sometimes um with patients is
that you know imagine a tree right and
it's growing and it's it starts having
to grow around obstacles right maybe
there's a maybe there's another tree and
its branches are in the way or maybe
there's a you know whatever there's a
house or there's a you know has to grow
around these obstacles right because
it's it's it's trying to get to the
light and and there are things that are
in the way uh and so so the tree takes
uh a shape as a result of having to make
those
adaptations um and and that's the shape
of the tree right uh it wouldn't be that
tree if it didn't have that shape uh and
and the story of this tree is actually a
story of adaptation and it's a story of
of resilience um and and it's a story of
making the best with what you had
available um and I think any of us would
go outside and we could see a tree and
no matter how like twisted around that
tree was or how unusual the shape of
that tree we could see Beauty in in in
that tree right um and and I feel like
this is the story for all living things
um and yourself included um and so if
you can find a way to sort of connect
with yourself
compassionately to see yourself in the
current state that you're in whatever
state that is uh in the way in the same
way that you might see that tree right
um if you can find the sort of the sort
of beauty there um I think that that's
that's you know
80% of of the struggle because for
people with path ological narcissism and
NPD you know there's so much like no I
have to be perfect no it has to be this
way right um and there's so much
pressure that that they end up putting
on themselves whether or not they
realize it um and and this this constant
scrutiny of self and this constant
comparison of self to others and this
constant sort of you know objectifying
of your own being in this way um it it
ends up causing you to feel like you're
not you're not in life you're not um
I've heard people describe it as like
not being a member of the human race in
some essential way right um I've heard
it described as like you know peering in
uh through the window from like a cold
you know being out in the cold and
looking in on like a a family like you
know having dinner or sitting around the
fire like there's just this way of
feeling outside the experience of being
human in some essential way and um and I
think that that has to do with this this
idea that you need to the the form of
you the shape of you needs to be a
certain right needs to fit a certain
preconceived ideal um and that's just
not how living things work it's not how
anything works it's not how you work um
and so beginning to understand that that
idea is a response actually to to
pressure that you felt from your
caregivers when you were young to you
know um the feeling of of not being
accepted or not being seen or not being
embraced or not being liked uh in some
in some way and so then you decided okay
well I'm gonna I'm gonna you know make
myself a different shape right so that I
can be liked and I can be good enough
and I can get these things these
essentially human experiences that I
seek um you know that's
there's nothing aberant about that
that's that's what I think anyone would
do given those conditions and so maybe
it's what you did and um but being able
to kind of see that for what it is it
was helpful then right it helped you
survive but now it's it's not it's not
helping you anymore it's just causing
you to feel like that person out in the
street looking in through the window
longing to be a part of of the the
community of people the community of
real people right that's another way
that I've heard it described um so allow
yourself to be real um and and that
means you know you are as you are um it
doesn't mean that you can't then take
further steps toward you know healing or
toward actualizing in in a you know a
way that feels good to you Etc but but
all of that work all of that progress
has to start uh from a place of
acceptance um and it can't be about like
I'm going to twist this thing until it
has the right shape it h it has to come
from a place of no this is I am as I am
and now I'm G to try to grow now I'm G
to try to heal um and so that I guess
that would be my my advice um and uh and
the other the other piece of that is
that you know that work is best
accomplished in the context of a
relationship with someone else who who
can give you help you to have have the
experience of being seen and accepted um
and uh and and so that you can begin to
see and accept um and that that's best
accomplished I think in a therapy uh
relationship with somebody who's who's
um able to give you that give you that
experience so thanks for the
question ah okay uh Mal adaptive
daydreaming uh this has come up before
and I don't think I've ever addressed it
yeah okay
um oh and then he goes on uh to say
please please give me guidance okay so
two two different things
um so how do we make sense of this um
Mal adaptive daydreaming stuff
um well I guess I would think of that in
terms of like uh in terms of well two
things one would be like a kind of wish
fulfillment in fantasy um and the other
one would be um a kind of uh avoidance
right and so um anytime somebody's kind
of veering off uh in a substantial
way in the direction of fantasy um I I
start to think about you know okay well
what is it about
life uh that's that you can't you can't
deal with you can't tolerate
right what you know so I I would be if I
were working with with you in therapy I
I would be really curious about the
themes of the Daydream right um so you
say it's of social acceptance and and
respect um it's you
know it seems like that like that
there's something about that um that is
I would imagine in your life um you're
not feeling accepted right you're not
feeling respected um so I I would want
to be having some conversations with you
about well what is respect to you right
what is acceptance um to you and um and
and what is it about what you're getting
uh or not getting um in your life right
like how does it measure up to the
fantasy or not measure up to the fantasy
um as far as like what what you can uh
start to do about this
um gosh you know it
it's it's really difficult to to say um
just you know based on just this like
one little snippet um my you know I I
would say as best you can um I would try
you know if it's up to 10 hours of your
day um then I would I would be wondering
with you about well what is it that
you're like what is it about your your
schedule that is allowing you to engage
in this kind of fantasy right for for so
so many hours of the day and and I would
I would actually be talking with you a
little bit about distraction right about
like okay well uh what how can we fill
up your time right so that there's more
engagement like you're kind of you kind
of have to engage more uh with with the
real world with other people um there's
something about having too much space uh
where you know you that that's allowing
you to kind of ruminate and to kind of
engage in what are probably kind of
obsessional uh fantasies at this point
um and and the more time you spend there
the less you it's kind of like a
Insidious cycle the more time you spend
there the less um able you feel to sort
of contend with you know the quote Real
World um and uh and so I would be trying
to figure out ways that you can spend
less time there and more time in the
real World um and and looking at at
adjustments you can make to your
schedule that that kind of enforce that
right um so you know maybe it means
looking at a at a different job or maybe
it means um you know like whatever it
means like I I don't know anything about
your life but just be thinking along
those lines uh that that's where I would
probably start as far as like a concrete
intervention
goes all right um
what's the difference between the
mastermind1 says what's the difference
between empathy sympathy and compassion
I see a lot of people using these words
interchangeably and if you don't have
much of one does that mean you don't
have less in all three so
um okay so empathy versus sympathy um
and now this look this is going to be my
take on this right I'm you know I'm not
Websters right so I don't or Miram
Webster or whatever it's called now but
I so this is my take on it um uh empathy
is feeling something as though it were
you like feeling what's happening to
somebody else as though it were
happening to you right so being able to
kind of Step into the shoes of somebody
else and
imagine what must this be like for them
that's empathy to my mind and and I
think cohut has a similar um Hines cohut
has a similar
definition um sympathy is feeling for
someone right so gosh I feel sorry for
him or her right I feel sorry for that
person that they're struggling in the
way that they're struggling and that
would be more of a sympathy uh and then
compassion um I guess is is sort of like
I imagine it sort of like sympathy um
but but there's a little bit more kind
of like
love involved right sort of
like
um it's not it's not just feeling sorry
for it's sort of like and I care about
you right and I and I really
care that that you're that that you're
experiencing this um so that that would
be how it comes up for me at least um I
don't know if it you know if you have
less of one does it mean you have less
of all three honestly I think that
there's kind of too much in some ways
there's kind of like too much emphasis
placed on like uh you know deficits or
lacks in empathy in NPD um it's like all
anybody talks about and I feel like they
kind of Miss like the
fundamental like piece aspects of the
actual disorder I yeah sometimes they
express themselves in impaired empathy
but even when that happens I feel like
what you're really seeing there is um
attachment avoidance which we talked
about before uh and um and and just just
a preoccupation right so when you're
preoccupied with something like you know
propping up a fragmenting experience of
self um you you just don't have a lot of
resources there to to have empathy for
other people you're you're you're
preoccupied right and so this there's a
kind of egocentrism that goes along with
that uh you know where it's just like
you know if I'm I I've said this in
another video if I'm starving all I
think about is food if I'm if I'm dying
of thirst all I think about is water if
I'm drowning all I think about is
getting that next breath of air uh I
don't have a lot of capacity to
empathize with other people in that
state and and uh NPD is a kind of
drowning it's a kind of starving there's
a there there's a way that the person is
so desperately trying to hold together
an a a viable experience of self um that
they just don't they just can't see
other people in that state necessarily
um but you know I do think that uh it's
the case that when when there when the
level of distress goes down uh for most
people with NPD um the uh capacity for
empathy goes up and um and and people
you know a lot of the commenters on my
channel they'll they'll observe that
phenomen on but they kind of draw a
different conclusion from it they say
well you know when he's out at the store
he's like Mr you know he's great you
know he's nice to everybody but then
when he comes home you know he's abusive
to
me um and I would say well that's
because the level
of distress or affect or whatever is
lower when you're out at the
store uh the stakes are lower um versus
is when you're at home and you're
dealing with a relationship that's
probably problematic in a number of
different ways uh and all of the um
stress uh and um pressure that somebody
with uh NPD can feel in uh the context
of a um of a close interpersonal
relationship um or an interpersonal
relationship where the other person is
trying to get close to them um there's
just there's all kinds of stuff that
comes up there and and the
disregulation that that goes along with
this disorder sometimes will tend to
show up in the context of that situation
much more readily than it will in a low
stake situation like you know going to
the store or something like that um so
you know I I really see this you know in
a way um as you
know where's the energy going right um
and uh and for people with NP that
energy is consumed by uh the um the sort
of central deficits itself um and their
attempts to manage that issue uh and so
they just they just don't they don't
tend to see other other people when
that's
happening uh so there you go okay thanks
for the
question all right uh this is kind of on
the same them theme as before uh do I
agree that with kernberg that narcissism
is a defense against borderline
disorder not necessarily um yeah I don't
I wouldn't say that it's a defense
against like borderline issues um you
know really what kernberg uh is his kind
of conceptualization as I understand it
um is that very early in the formation
of the
self or the kind of self structure um
there is there's just too much
frustration uh the the the baby
essentially um is trying to get its
needs met um and you know and not just
like needs in terms of like food and
stuff shelter but but like emotional
needs met and the caregiver is not
meeting those needs for whatever reason
or they're meeting them in a way that is
just causing the infant to just be
flooded with toxic primitive uh
aggression and frustration and so
there's a little they start to the
psyche starts to make like a little
tweak um to to try to circumvent that
flooding of primitive uh aggression and
frustration uh and and what it does is
it it begins to merge with its own ego
ideal the ego begins to merge with its
own ego ideal uh in order to
shortcircuit dependency on frustrating
caregivers uh and that's in K in
kernberg's formulation that's where that
that kind of grandiose
self-sufficient uh presentation comes
from uh and in his mind the center of
that is aggression um and and he calls
it it's called primitive aggression
because it it belongs to a very uh early
developmental stage um and um so that's
not really a defense against a a
borderline you know disorder or
experience that's a defense against
dependency um and because dependency is
experienced as too frustrating um so
that's that's my understanding of of
kernberg's idea there
um I would say that to the extent that
the uh sort of Personality organization
in NPD is at the borderline level then
the uh the kind of false self
grandiosity uh is is an attempt to not
experience that distress not not
experience the fragment the
fragmenting uh self-
States excuse
me that that sort of live in a
borderline uh personality organization
and so there's like this kind of island
of like order right uh in in NPD and
that that would be the false self uh
sort of compensatory
grandiose Island right and then when
that um gets flooded you know or it
falls apart or collapses however however
you want to do the metaphor then uh
there there can be an experience of the
underlying borderline uh States and
conflicts so that might be uh what what
you're referring to and if that's the
case then I I would tend to agree thanks
for the question and just one second I
just have to cough real quick
excuse me a frog in my
throat
um Molly
ringworm uh asks is it true that
borderline level pathological narcs I
don't I don't really like the term narc
uh I feel like that's a bit dehumanizing
but
um uh don't experience positive emotion
no that's not true um it's uh
there's positive emotion experienced um
it's really it has to do with an
instability in the um in the the
experience of self uh and so um often
times uh when a person is in a
vulnerable state they are overwhelmed by
their their by what we call introjective
preoccupations and these are just
preoccupations about the the goodness or
viability or effectiveness of self
uh they just feel like they're just
they're just drowning in in often
negative affect things like shame
humiliation rage Envy um you know stuff
like that um a and and so to to the
extent that that is filling up the
screen then yeah they're probably not
experiencing a lot of positive emotions
uh there there's a tendency toward
depression uh in in those States and
also uh unfortunately things like
suicidality tend to happen uh in those
States as well um but it's it's not that
they can't experience positive emotion
in those States it's just that that they
tend to be preoccupied by the distress
that in other states like grandio States
uh they're not necessarily tuning into
right so in the grandios um states that
the distress is put away somewhere else
uh and so there's there's more room to
have positive emotions in those States
uh but but it's not like there some like
they can't uh experience positive
emotion
um let's
see all
right so some of these questions I feel
like I've already kind of glanced uh on
or addressed a little bit so I'm I'm not
answering every question here um
so I'm curious about this one Mark uh do
I believe in switching therapists when
it comes to Healing both for NPD and the
Survivor so I'm I'm wondering uh what do
you
mean
um like if the therapy is ineffective
you mean or if the person doesn't
understand seem to understand
NPD in that case yeah then I I I might
might think about switching to somebody
who feels like a better fit
um let me know if that's if that's not
what the question is but uh
that's there's my
answer
um gosh what else
okay Rufus
demand uh his friend is going through
some stuff but he watches my channel can
I do a shout out for Cosmo sure shout
out to Cosmo um and glad you're here uh
supporting him um give him some some
advice about dealing with
self-sacrificial
Tendencies
um I think it can be hard sometimes for
for people and this is kind of like a
little bit of like an oxymoron in some
ways because people would imagine well
of course course someone with NPD or
narcissism you know they feel entitled
to everything right um but that's not
necessarily the case in fact the
entitlement that is expressed um it
tends to have a kind of a foundation in
in like severe um and profound
ambivalence and doubt about being
entitled to anything at all and that's
in fact where the the kind of toxic
shame that goes along with narcissism
comes from right um and so you know I
feel like um just there's often uh you
know some some issues around like
feeling that you actually
deserve things like you actually deserve
to be cared about as you are right this
something I was talking about earlier
when it comes to to self-acceptance like
and the idea like I've talked to so many
people uh who you know they say
something like well I just you know I
like I don't I have no idea why my wife
loves me or my spouse cares about me or
presume presumably cares about me right
what what is it about me that they could
possibly love or care about and and I
feel like that is just so like just like
a direct line from that idea like all I
see when I hear that is like that just
this little just this little kiddo you
know just not getting not having the
experience not being shown that they're
worth loving um and it's just H just
like breaks my heart to think about that
um um and and so I think there can often
be some conflict around like deserving
things um and uh and I guess my you know
my advice there would be for Cosmo
to um ask himself or herself or their
themselves I I don't know what gender
Cosmo identifies as but uh oh you you
said him okay ask himself
um uh what that's about you know like
does he not feel that he actually
deserves things is there conflict around
that and if so um to to to be curious
about that you know to begin to notice
what what contexts does this
self-sacrifice occur in what does it
cost him you know but also what's the
secondary gain as well you know there's
always there's always a duality right
there's always a a cost and a and a
benefit uh to any coping strategy
anything that somebody's does is a cost
and there's a benefit so begin to ask
himself about that and begin to feel
curious about that and notice just kind
of like the patterns that are involved
um and that's that's a good first first
couple of steps uh for something like
that so thank
you all right uh
let's see uh I'm not sure that I
understand this but I might just be
reading it wrong when I was talking
about the empathic approach to Healing
people with NPD or narcissistic traits
can I give a general concrete example of
what immersing
them what may I'm not ah whoa I'm just
I'm just or who yeah I just I'm sorry I
don't
I don't understand the question um if
you can maybe uh try to rephrase that
and and put it in the chat um I might be
able to to
respond um see uh Lisa Taylor Austin
says hi Dr Eaton hi Lisa uh for anybody
who doesn't know I did an interview with
uh with Lisa on her Channel um and I
highly recommend you go check it out and
go check out her Channel as well uh
she's got some good stuff on there uh so
thank thanks for thanks for showing uh
thanks for showing up and thanks for
saying hi it's good to see
you ah here we go okay immersing them in
that empathy they didn't get from their
caregiver okay
um yeah so uh I I just I feel like
that's just a basic that's just a basic
stance right um and and you would be
doing that in any kind of in any good
therapist would be responding
empathically to their patients right the
difference uh with NPD is that the NPD
presentation unless it's fragmenting and
vulnerable um is often there's like this
defensive
self-sufficiency and uh and so it can be
so difficult to get through that to
actually see the the vulnerable uh parts
of them uh that are that are inside um
in addition to that uh there's often a
kind of a reactivity that the person
will have uh where they will respond to
your attempts to get close in a kind of
a distancing way or in a defensive way
and that can be uh somewhat off-putting
especially to a therapist you know who's
who's like whoa okay hey buddy if you
don't want me to help then I you know
like there can be like this kind of
defensive way that the therapist can
respond too to that and so um somebody
with NPD who's who's having those issues
they go through therapy after therapy
after therapy either feeling totally not
seen by the therapist or feeling uh in
some ways like punished or criticized or
attacked by the therapist uh and so one
of the reasons why MPD is difficult to
treat is because the Dynamics can be so
provocative and so um you know it can be
such a roller coaster ride for for both
parties but for the therapist in
particular because they're they keep
trying the job is to keep trying to get
close to a part part of the person that
is surrounded by um by shame and by uh
sensitivity you know to like hyp
sensitivity to feeling attacked or
criticized um and and sometimes rage um
and and it's protected by this sort of
gr like grandiose self image uh that may
or may not be grounded in any kind of
reality and so uh it can it's it's very
challenging to find way ways to connect
to the the authenticity of the person
when you're kind of fielding all all of
this other stuff that's there to protect
the person right it's there to protect
the person uh both from
um re rra being ret traumatized uh but
it's also there to protect them from
their own um internal
instability uh in terms of self-esteem
and so um you know I
think the empathy often just has to do
with like just just trying always to
stay close to what you imagine uh the
kind of the the central vulnerabilities
to be always tring trying to stay close
like in my mind I'm always trying to
stay close to like the little the little
kiddo in there right and just trying to
listen to what that kiddo has to say
trying to listen for that kiddo's
experience their fears their longings uh
their their anger their hurt um and and
looking for the ways that that is is
being expressed uh indirectly or in a
disguised way or sometimes in a in a
totally inverted way um based on on the
kind of configuration there um so I I
don't know if that's concrete enough for
you but that's that's kind of as as good
an example as I can kind of give just
right off the top of my head thanks for
the
question let's see
uh max power wants to know what do I get
out of
this and is it personally fulfilling
yeah
um I
mean I didn't
nobody like made me nobody made me
specialize in this you know um I I I
specialized in this because it it the
these these issues I see them as
um fundamentally human uh and um and
there's a there's a a kind of a
tragedy that speaks to me um and
uh and because um it just makes sense to
me um and so um yeah I find it I find it
personally fulfilling um both to think
about these things to write about them
to produce uh content for public
consumption about it um and then also to
teach about it and then uh most of all
to to treat uh this this population and
their loved ones um and partly it's it's
if I'm being honest it's because I so
frequently have the experience of some
coming in and doing you know a few
sessions or sometimes less than one
session before they're like you know oh
my God like nobody's
ever I've never had anybody get it
before you know uh and that and
something about that uh the experience
of knowing that somebody feels found
that they feel discovered maybe for the
first time in a meaningful way in their
entire life that that's a that to me
that's a
um that's a a special thing to be a part
of and so um yeah you know um thanks for
the
question all
right yeah so DH the problem is that we
narcissists tend to look at empathic
people as weak or marks that we can
easily manipulate or use yeah in a in a
grandiose State that's
how I would imagine that would show up
um but uh that
that's to my mind also based in a
fundamental denial of the dependency
longings that uh lie underneath that
grandiose
defense um and it can be very difficult
to let
somebody close enough to actually have
an impact on you um and that can also be
a terrifying experience as well um and
uh and so the defenses get get rallied
and you know um it becomes about you
know not your weakness or your need but
the other person's weakness and their
need um and
um you know that's that's just kind of
how that defensive structure works uh in
my
experience so I get it yeah it's hard um
and and I I often have the experience of
like trying to connect to that sort of
the the needful part of a patient and
them and and I see it too many times to
count like just the person being like no
like that's not that's not me right I
hate pity I hate people feeling
sorry for me you know right and and and
and and I you know sometimes I try to
move too F too quickly in that direction
and I have to take a step back and be
like okay you know like I I I hear you
right that felt that felt like too much
or it felt too close or that didn't feel
so good so
we'll we'll try we'll try again another
time you know um so uh but that yeah
those Dynamics are very present uh in in
in NPD so thank you for articulating
that piece of it
ah tan have I considered bias in working
with narcissists who want to heal how do
I empathize with the sufferers of
narcissism while staying empathic toward
narcissists uh yeah I mean that sure
there's a self- selection bias here
right you know both on my part uh you
know as the the clinician
who is drawn to this work and then also
on the part of the patient who
yeah who says who is capable or able to
take a look at themselves and say yeah I
want to I want to make a change here um
and and self- selects for therapy uh
absolutely yeah um but you know uh that
being said um I also consume the
research right I mean I I read a lot of
research about NPD and a lot of
literature about
NPD uh and it all it's all what I'm
saying it's some variant on what I'm
saying here um
you don't it doesn't seem that way to
folks who aren't in the field because
they're watching you know the rest of
the stuff on YouTube and so much of that
is just is just not helpful and they're
reading articles online that are you
know like
you that are pathologizing or
stigmatizing or
whatever and kind of buying into this
construct of NPD with where it's about
lack of empathy and abuse uh and that's
it those two things those are the
defining characteristics of NPD and it's
not that's not those are not the
defining characteristics of
NPD finding characteristics of MPD are
uh fundamental uh instability of self uh
that takes the form of core conflicts
around
self-esteem um essentially like I said
last time it's
unstable
unrealistic um and uh and and and so you
know so a core issue right and then
there are maladaptive coping strategies
that are developed very early in life to
help manage that core
vulnerability that's NPD um sometimes it
can take the form of abusive treatment
of other people uh it by the way uh it
also takes the form of abusive treatment
of the self as well there's a reason why
NPD is significantly correlated with
suicide
um this is an at risk population
objectively speaking um and so you
know um is there bias in terms of the
population I work with yes uh I will
admit that but uh go go read the
literature yourself like act actual you
know uh peer reviewed literature on NPD
uh and and and see what see what you
find um and I guarantee it's not going
to be the boogeyman that YouTube has uh
you know wants you to believe it is so
thanks let's
see uh by the way I'm going to go to
3:30 my time so it's um half past the
hour whatever time it is for you
uh here's a good question also by tan
you're asking some good questions today
thank you for these um do you think at
any point in their lives narcissists
choose to become narcissists perhaps by
giving up on themselves in a way or do
you think even high self-awareness would
not be enough uh I just I just you know
I don't
know I don't know if I believe in Free
Will at the end of the day so that that
might be a little bit of a a little bit
of a ring wrinkle uh in in the in the
equation here
um but let's set that philosophical
issue aside for a second and just think
about what it would mean for somebody to
choose to become a narcissist right
um in my
experience uh what folks who have these
issues want desperately
is to feel
understood and to feel seen in a
way that that that helps them to make a
kind of
compassionate uh sense of their internal
experience
um one that isn't kind of being
swallowed continuously by a kind of
Shame
uh or a kind of
uh like mix of envy and
rage
um they just they just want to be loved
I mean really like that's at at its base
right um and it that that takes all
kinds of squirely you know directions
developmentally um but that that is that
that's what it is at its base in my
experience
since the kind of net result of
narcissism is is actually one where you
feel that it is impossible to be
loved because nobody can actually see
what's re who you really are on the
inside all they see is what you put out
there right I mean that's the kind of
curse of the false self-defense is that
it gets so good at being the false self
that it convinces everybody sometimes
the narcissist included that that that's
the real person that's the whole person
so that that's such a profound obstacle
to the feeling of actually being cared
about um that I know I don't think
anybody ever chooses that or would
choose that knowingly
um I also don't think that it's a choice
in so far as these issues go far enough
back that they have their roots in
preverbal experience so that's before
they were even there was even a concept
of self and other um really I mean like
a one that's presented represented right
in the
mind these experiences go back to the
first year of Life uh and and the self
structure that's built from those
experience from those experiences and
the personality structure that's built
out of those experiences you know we're
talking like first four maybe five years
of life here uh and this this is not
something that children can choose uh no
no no aspect of this is is the product
of conscious choice in my opinion um I
think that people they end up in
adolescence and they begin to have these
experiences then that are kind of
characteristic of
narcissism and and some of sometimes
they begin to wonder well what is it
about me what is it about relationships
that I keep having these kinds of exper
experiences some of them don't some some
don't have that level of insight and and
just persist in the kind of uh
grandiosity you know the inflation
collapse inflation collapse inflation
collapse and that's just they go through
life that way um but I don't think that
it's ever a a product of a like a
conscious
Choice thanks for the
question what
else how can NPD trigger hypo IC
episodes uh
yeah
so
um there's different ways to think about
this um the way that cohut and others
conceptualize this is in the form of
horizontal and vertical splits in the
personality the um the vertical split is
between the grandios and the symptomatic
experience of self right the grandiose
and the vulnerable experience of self
the horizontal Al split is having to do
with uh the um all of the kind of Life
Energy of the S the libidinal energy of
of the
psyche is accessible to the grandios
side of the split whereas the vulnerable
side is cut off from that
um this is all like psychoanalytic stuff
um so when somebody is in a vulnerable
or a symptomatic State there is a
depressive kind of phenomenon where they
just don't have access in some ways to
that the creative vital energy uh that
they do have access to when they're on
the grandio side of the
split maybe that's true maybe it's not I
don't know that's just one that's one
way of conceptualizing
it I think what ends up happening um if
we take all the theory out really
is that um when somebody is in a
grandiose uh phase of this
disorder um they feel like possibilities
are endless right I mean there's a
reason why uh in bipolar disorder Mania
is often accompanied by grandiosity
right um it's because those two kind of
go hand inand right when you're euic
when you're you know when you're just
like man everything is good and I'm good
and I can do what whatever I want and
this is great I'm just like I'm
just filled with potential right I mean
that that that's going to be like that
state of mind will itself but get a kind
of hypom mania right because you just
feel like well everything's possible
I'm gonna go do it right uh and and
that that can kind of feed on itself uh
and sometimes turn into yeah like an
actual hypomanic episode especially if
there's already perhaps some kind of a
biological uh you know predisposition to
something like a bipolar 2 disorder or
cyclothymic you know something or other
right um so uh whereas when the person
is in a collapsed or vulnerable state
all of that possibility is foreclosed on
right it's just like no none of it's
possible none of it's acceptable or
accessible the self that I was the self
that could do all of those things is
lost it's gone and I can't get back
there and and and that begins to trigger
a depressive uh experience a depressive
episode uh so that's that's really I
think what happens that's what I see
happening in my practice with with folks
um I see plenty of folks who have I
think erroneously been diagnosed with
some kind of bipolar disorder I know
Otto kernberg talks about that as well
uh that he feels a lot of um bipolar
diagnosis you know might actually be
something more like
um you know personality uh disorders and
splitting basically um including NPD so
I hear plenty of folks with NPD talk
about you know this experience of self
where they're like they like you know
they're the life of the party they're
you know just they just feel like
there's just endless potential uh and
and they just
feel
uh like just you know Peak like
self-experience um and and and the the
that can sort of happen in kind of such
like a distilled or kind of pure form
because of the uh splitting right and so
all of the bad is split off and it's
kept on the other side of that kind of
vertical split right uh and so when
they're in the grandiose State uh for
some people it is just it's like just
mainlining good feelings you know um and
uh and and there's none of the bad to to
to muddy the water there um so thanks
for the
question um what else
these are some good uh some good
questions today everybody thank you for
them
um Norman uh wants to know if overc
consumption of marijuana can lead to the
development of NPD no uh that is I do
not believe that's how it works uh like
I said these issues uh they tend to be
rooted in very early velopmental trauma
relational trauma
um now you know so so that's kind of the
core that's kind of the foundation right
and then you know over time like when
the person becomes an adult or whatever
yeah I mean there can be different
things that can kind of precipitate
experiences of expansiveness or
experiences of collapse right um and you
know drug use can certainly be one of
them right um or and or the the kinds of
internal states that are precipitated by
you know drug use you know um for for
good or ill right
um
so yeah um but I I don't think that um
that marijuana use itself could cause
NPD uh that's I don't think that's a
possibility thank you for the question
yeah so Teton uh about you know the kind
of direction that like the ICD is going
um where looking at personality disorder
as kind of a
a not a car categorical
uh thing but more of like a Continuum or
a
spectrum um or yeah I I I think that's
valid um the my version of that that I
tend to to use it's not my version the
version of that that I tend to use is um
like I said that that kind of Continuum
that developmental Continuum from
psychotic through borderline and
neurotic up toward healthy personality
organization
so um you know with like anytime
somebody has a personality disorder
they're either at the borderline level
of Personality organization or The
Psychotic level
um
and there is some categorical piece
there that has to do with the kind of
central uh deficits or the the core
conflicts and characteristic uh
defensive adaptations that develop
around the those core conflicts and I do
think that those can validly be uh
separated out into dis kind of like
discreet you know personality Styles but
but I think there's always some overlap
there's always some bleeding
into uh you know from one to the other
uh and and the main thing to be thinking
about there is the borderline
personality
organization uh or or psychotic
organization um that that that is the
cause of all the trouble right because
somebody uh who has got a a narcissistic
personality
style but is like healthy right you know
kind of at that healthy in that healthy
level of of Personality organization um
they
um
um they aren't kind of dealing with the
same issues they're not dealing with the
splitting and the projecting and the
distorted reality and the kind of wildly
fluctuating experience of self and other
people uh the boundary confusion uh the
emotional disregulation uh and distress
tolerance issues like they're not
they're not having those problems
because those problems live in the
borderline and The Psychotic ranges of
Personality
organization uh so that's why I say in
some of my videos
right a person who has NPD they will
always have a narcissistic personality
style issues about self-worth and
self-esteem will always sit as Central
motivators in their behavior and their
psychology
but all of the other problematic things
that go along with NPD those are about a
narcissistic personality style organized
at the border at the borderline level
and if we can help the person to develop
past that borderline range and into a
more kind of neurotic and eventually
even healthy personality
organization then uh then they just
they're just they just a you know we all
have Central conflicts and things that
motivate us and things that we're afraid
of and whatever else I mean that's what
it is to be a person um the problem is
when those core conflicts are surrounded
by a defensive organization that causes
the person to distort reality to blur
the boundary between self and other and
uh and when it causes a kind of
continual disruption uh in the
continuity of internal experience and by
that I mean splitting right uh where one
part of the self can't communicate to
another part of the self uh and
experiences become siloed uh and um and
and that that that leads to extreme
sometimes discontinuity between
different self States
okay uh is there a way to learn empathy
um
yeah um yeah uh that's you learn by by
receiving it really I mean that's that's
where it comes from That's How any of us
learn
empathy uh so um you
know to be empathized
with uh over time you begin to
internalize that experience and it
becomes a capacity that you now have not
just to empathize with yourself and
understand your own self- States but
also via that insight to understand the
self states of other people um so you
know we can't give what we haven't got
right and so uh if if there's kind of no
self or if the self is in pieces and
those pieces exist in these siloed you
know kind of parts of of of the
personality and we can't get from one to
the other and they don't communicate
well and whatever else it's going to be
very difficult then
to uh empathize with other people not
just because as I said before the
preoccupations that come from having
this kind of continually fragmenting
unstable experience of self but also
because when somebody is kind of in this
siloed experience over here right it's
going to be very difficult for them to
conceptualize the self- state of
somebody who's experiencing something
that's not inside that that kind of
siloed experience of self um until they
flip to another Silo that does
correspond and then they're like oh yeah
no I get that right but that can be
crazy making to the people around them
too
yeah so Colin from Glasgow is asking me
about genetics um so you know the jury's
out about that and not not whether or
not genetics is a part of it because of
course genetics are a part but to what
extent uh like how big of a part do they
play uh the studies that I've seen um
and this is just me kind of you know
pulling pulling out this out of my
memory right so uh but it's around 25%
um and that's a pretty big that's a
pretty big proportion um the the way
that I think about this is uh we're all
we all come into the world with a
certain kind of uh temperament right a
certain characteristic way of responding
to stimulus right um perhaps we're
hypers sensitive perhaps we're not
perhaps we are easy to soothe or
difficult to soothe as babies perhaps
we're kind of you know there all kinds
of different ways that we could kind of
just be come into the world with kind of
this neurological apparatus that's
primed based on our genetics to
synthesize experience in a certain way
um and then exper you know and and then
like the world starts happening to us
right well it's it's happening us to to
us in the womb as well but you know we
come out and we we behold the world in a
way uh so that kind of genetic
predisposition
is acted upon by the quality of
experience that we have especially in
those first few years of life when we're
building a basic
personality
um and so some children are going to be
predisposed to hypers sensitivity right
to all kinds of different experiences so
you know I think that this is a is a
valid critique uh that some folks have
of the kind of the
psychoanalytic uh models right uh is
that well it's too it blames the mother
too much or it blames the caregivers too
much and okay I hear that um it's not so
much that I'm saying yeah somebody did
this to you it's more like you came into
the world and you had this sort of
canvas right and the dimensions of the
canvas and the color of the canvas and
how well it absorbs paint and whatever
else that's all just those are qualities
of the canvas you came into the world
with it uh and then and then experience
begins to paint on this canvas
right there for children who happen to
be kind of exquisitly attuned right to
what seems to be going
on inside of other people right so Alice
Miller calls this the gifted child um
and they're paired with a caregiver
who's preoccupied for some reason maybe
because of their own narcissistic
preoccupation
or whatever and they just don't they're
just not available for the child in in
the way that the child needs them to be
available then I think that can begin to
get internalized in the form of this
kind of caretaking false self uh
construct excuse
me um and the same goes for any other
personality based issue right where it's
like you've got you've got the child and
they're genetic predispositions and then
you've got the goodness of fit that the
environment presents to that child and
if there's a good match then great it's
probably not going to be a big problem
but if it's a bad match uh then there's
going to be sometimes a tremendous
problem um so that's that's kind of how
I think about it um I tend to talk more
just about and focus more on like okay
there's trauma right and and what I mean
to say is not that like someone
traumatized you right and it's not like
that kind of a blaming sort of
conceptualization the trauma is the
result of the the bad match between what
your kind of canvas is and and what
experience was painting on it U and so
that's that's kind of how I
conceptualize it trauma nonetheless
right but it's not necessarily
somebody's fault
um all right I'm just gonna I'm going to
scan the rest of these questions real
quick just to see if there's anything
that I can I can get
to uh
quickly so this one here I just thank
you for this Robert um oh I just lost my
screen one sec
huh well okay uh everybody I I'm I'm I'm
Flying Blind now for whatever reason my
monitor just cut out and uh I know from
experience if I try to unplug it and
plug it back in I'm going to lose the
camera too so uh what I want to say is
thank you so much everyone for being
here uh I just so much appreciate uh
this this great community and the
community involvement and and all you
folks showing up and asking me such
great questions so thanks so much for
this this is something I'm going to try
to do I think on a monthly basis um and
uh keep bringing keep bringing great
great questions and comments and um uh
thanks again okay everybody take care
and uh I'll see you next time bye